India and Indian National Movement:

The history of India includes several the prehistoric settlements and various periods of rich cultural, scientific, spiritual and technological advancements; the advancement of civilisation from the earliest recorded Indus Valley Civilisation and events blending of the Indo-Aryan races. This period is spiritually important because of the birth and nourishment of several world religions like Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism;Followed by the onset of a succession of powerful dynasties and empires who made their presence strong and seeded the growth of India with regard to all spheres, also to mention the growth of Muslim dominions during the Medieval period; Everything ending up with the advent of European traders and privateers, resulting in the establishment of British India and other instances of East India company establishments; followed by the subsequent  Indian independence movement that led to various radical transformations such as the Partition of India and the creation of the Republic of India.


Revlot of 1857:
Nationalist historians have seen in it the first Indian war of independence. In fact, it was rather the last effort of traditional India for Independence.

Causes of 1857 revlot:
 It began on a point of caste pollution; its leaders were traditionalists who looked to reviving the past, while the small new Westernized class actively supported the British. And the leaders were not united, because they sought to revive former Hindu and Muslim regimes, which in their heyday had bitterly clashed. But something important was required to provoke so many to seize the opportunity of a military uprising to stage a war of independence.

Bhagat Singh:
Bhagat Singh (Punjabi pronunciation: [pə̀ɡət̪ sɪ́ŋɡ] (About this soundlisten) 1907[a] – 23 March 1931) was an Indian socialist revolutionary whose two acts of dramatic violence against the British in India and execution at age 23 made him a folk hero of the Indian independence movement.

In December 1928, Bhagat Singh and an associate, Shivaram Rajguru, fatally shot a 21-year-old British police officer, John Saunders, in Lahore, British India, mistaking Saunders, who was still on probation, for the British police superintendent

Rani laxmi Bai:Lakshmibai, the Rani of Jhansi (About this soundpronunciation (help·info); 19 November 1828 – 18 June 1858),[1][2] was an Indian queen of the Maratha princely state of Jhansi in North India currently present in Jhansi district in Uttar Pradesh, India.[3] She was one of the leading figures of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and became a symbol of resistance to the British Raj for Indian nationalists.


Subash Chandra Bose:
bhas Chandra Bose (23 January 1897 – 18 August 1945)[9][g] was an Indian nationalist whose defiant patriotism made him a hero in India, but whose attempt during World War II to rid India of British rule with the help of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan left a troubled legacy. The honorific Netaji (Hindustani: "Respected Leader"), first applied in early 1942 to Bose in Germany by the Indian soldiers of the Indische Legion and by the German and Indian officials in the Special Bureau for India in Berlin, was later used throughout India.[15][n]

Lokmanya Tilak:
Bal Gangadhar Tilak (or Lokmanya Tilak, About this soundpronunciation (help·info); 23 July 1856 – 1 August 1920), born as Keshav Gangadhar Tilak, was an Indian nationalist, teacher, and an independence activist. He was one third of the Lal Bal Pal triumvirate.Tilak was the first leader of the Indian Independence Movement. The British colonial authorities called him "The father of the Indian unrest." He was also conferred with the title of "Lokmanya", which means "accepted by the people (as their leader)". Mahatma Gandhi called him "The Maker of Modern India"


Indian National Congress (INC):
The Indian National Congress first convened in December 1885, though the idea of an Indian nationalist movement opposed to British rule dated from the 1850s. During its first several decades, the Congress Party passed fairly moderate reform resolutions, though many within the organization were becoming radicalized by the increased poverty that accompanied British imperialism. In the early 20th century, elements within the party began to endorse a policy of swadeshi (“of our own country”), which called on Indians to boycott of imported British goods and promoted Indian-made goods. By 1917 the group’s “extremist” Home Rule wing, which was formed by Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Annie Besant the previous year, had begun to exert significant influence by appealing to India’s diverse social classes.
Real Aim of Congress was to train the Indian youth in political agitation and to create public opinion in the country. For this, they use the method of the annual session, where they discuss the problem and pass the resolution. It came out to be one of the essential parts of freedom of India and in the history of India and Indian National Movements.

Causes of Indian National Movement 
The rise of national consciousness in India took place towards the latter half of the 19th century only. Before that, there were struggles and battles against British colonialism but they were all confined to smaller areas and in any case, did not encompass the whole of India. In fact, some scholars at the time did not consider India to be a country. Though political union had occurred in the past under great kings like Ashoka and Akbar and under the Marathas to an extent, they were not permanent. However, cultural unity was always seen and foreign powers always referred to the subcontinent as India or Hind as being one entity, despite being ruled by many rulers.
It can be said that the national movement, with the political and social emancipation of the people as its aim, arose in India in 1885, with the formation of the Indian National Congress.


Gandhiji:
Mahatma Gandhi, byname of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, (born October 2, 1869, Porbandar, India—died January 30, 1948, Delhi), Indian lawyer, politician, social activist, and writer who became the leader of the nationalist movement against the British rule of India. As such, he came to be considered the father of his country. Gandhi is internationally esteemed for his doctrine of nonviolent protest (satyagraha) to achieve political and social progress.

Satyagraha
The word Satyagraha is from the Sanskrit words satya (meaning "truth") and Agraha ("insistence", or "holding firmly to"). For Gandhi, Satyagraha went far beyond just "passive resistance" (resisting without taking action) according to him it was a moral force born of truth and non-violence. His non-violence also became his strength. He said that he chose the name because Truth means Love, and Insistence means Force, and the Sanskrit name showed it was a force born from Truth and Love (non-violence).[1].

Dandi March:
One of the most important events in India’s struggle for independence took place when Mahatma Gandhi launched the Civil Disobedience Movement with his famous Dandi March, which began on 12th March 1930 and ended on April 6th, 1930.  Dandi March or Salt Satyagraha was a non-violent means of protest led by Mahatma Gandhi  which garnered huge public support and worldwide attention. Gandhiji walked from his ashram in Sabarmati in today’s Gujarat to small town of Dandi near coastal Surat to protest against the repressive salt tax imposed by the colonial government. This march covering the distance of roughly 385 km worked as a catalyst for India’s struggle for Independence. The salt Satyagraha (Sanskrit word meaning ‘holding onto truth’) was based on Gandhi’s principle of non-violence. Gandhi believed that non-violent means of protest with the means of ‘soul force’ was the right method to fight political and social injustice. Dandi March demonstrated Gandhi’s experiments with his non-violent means of political action. This kind of political action has been unprecedented in the history of political protest around the world.

Quit India:
On 7 to 8 August 1942, the All India Congress Committee met in Bombay and ratified the 'Quit India' resolution. Gandhi called for 'Do or Die'. The next day, on 9 August 1942, Gandhi, members of the Congress Working Committee and other Congress leaders were arrested by the British Government under the Defence of India Rules. The Working Committee, the All India Congress Committee and the four Provincial Congress Committees were declared unlawful associations under the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1908. The assembly of public meetings were prohibited under rule 56 of the Defence of India Rules. The arrest of Gandhi and the Congress leaders led to mass demonstrations  throughout India. Thousands were killed and injured in the wake of the 'Quit India' movement. Strikes were called in many places. The British swiftly suppressed many of these demonstrations by mass detentions; more than 100,000 people were imprisoned.

The 'Quit India' movement, more than anything, united the Indian people against British rule. Although most demonstrations had been suppressed by 1944, upon his release in 1944 Gandhi continued his resistance and went on a 21-day fast. By the end of the Second World War, Britain's place in the world had changed dramatically and the demand for independence could no longer be ignored.


Non-Coperation Movement:
Noncooperation movement, unsuccessful attempt in 1920–22, organized by Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi, to induce the British government of India to grant self-government, or swaraj, to India. It was one of Gandhi's first organized acts of large-scale civil disobedience (satyagraha).

Jallianwala Bagh Massacre:
The Jallianwala Bagh massacre, also known as the Amritsar massacre, took place on 13 April 1919, when Acting Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer ordered troops of the British Indian Army to fire their rifles into a crowd of unarmed Indian civilians in Jallianwala Bagh, Amritsar, Punjab, killing at least 400 people .

Rowlatt Act:
Rowlatt Acts, (February 1919), legislation passed by the Imperial Legislative Council, the legislature of British India. The acts allowed certain political cases to be tried without juries and permitted internment of suspects without trial.

India Pakistan Divide:
The partition was outlined in the Indian Independence Act 1947 and resulted in the dissolution of the British Raj, or Crown rule in India. The two self-governing countries of India and Pakistan legally came into existence at midnight on 15 August 1947.

Jawharlal Nehru:
Jawaharlal Nehru  14 November 1889 – 27 May 1964) was an Indian independence activist, and subsequently, the first Prime Minister of India and a central figure in Indian politics before and after independence.


















