India and Indian National Movement
As far as we consider the History of India and Indian National movement have been through a series of struggles for Freedom, including Political, Socio-Culture, and Economic factors. As we see the past of India, it contains a vast number of incidents which were important at that time and are considered as one of the essential parts in Indian history and especially for Exams like UPSC.
Indian National Congress (INC)
With the increasing Political influences at that time, the INC was founded in the premises of Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit School on 28 December 1885, in Bombay
Real Aim of Congress was to train the Indian youth in political agitation and to create public opinion in the country. For this, they use the method of the annual session, where they discuss the problem and pass the resolution. It came out to be one of the essential parts of freedom of India and in the history of India and Indian National Movements.
Other Political Movements
oMuslim league was founded in 1906 by Agah Khan III and Moshin Mulk.
oLala Hardayal started Gadhar Movement in 1913 and founded the Gadhar party on 1st November 1913. Its headquarter was set up in San Francisco and began the publication.
oKomgata Maru Incident took place on Sept. 1914, and a committee was set up named as “Shore Committee” to fight the legal battle of passengers.

After the start of the First World War in 1914.
Some of the most essential movements in History of India and Indian National Movement.
oTilak in April 1916 started Home Rule Movement, and it’s headquarter was at Poona and demanded Swaraj.
oIn 1916 Lucknow Session of Congress was presided by Ambika Charan Majumdar where both Extremist and Moderate leaders were united.
oAnnie Besant on September 1916, started Home Rule movement, and it’s headquarter was at Adiyar near Madras.
oGovernment of India Act 1919 or the Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms Act was passed to establish a responsible Government in India.
oOn 9th January 1915, Gandhi Ji returns to India from South Africa at the age of 46.
oChamparan Satyagraha – 1917
oKheda Satyagraha – 1917
oIn 1916, Gandhi Ji founded Sabarmati Ashram at Ahmadabad (Gujarat) to preach the idea of truth and non-violence.
oAhmadabad Mill Strike – 1918
oRowlatt Act Satyagraha February 1919
oGandhi Ji founded the Satyagraha Sabha on February 1919. This was the first movement of Gandhi Ji. In this movement, student, labor, middle class, and capitalist participated, and congress as an organization was nowhere.
oJallianwala Bagh Massacre on 13 April 1919. People were gathered at Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar. It was to protest against the arrest of Saifuddin Kitchlew and Satyapal on 13 April 1919.
oIn October 1920, All India Trade Union Congress was founded in Bombay by N. M Joshi, Ray Chaudhary and presided over by Lala Lajpat Ray.
oOn 1st August 1920, Khilafat Committee launched a Non-Cooperation movement on triple issues- Punjab wrongs, Khilafat issue and Demand for Swaraj.
oAkali Movement was started in 1920.
oIn 1925, the SGPC (Shiromani Gurudwara Prabhandak Committee) was founded.
oCR Das and Motilal Nehru formed congress Khilafat Swaraj Party.
oAlso famous for the second split in the congress.
oIn 1927, Workers & Peasant Party (WPP) was formed at Bombay by S.S Mirajkar, K. N Juglekar, and S.V Ghate.
oIn 1924, H.R.A (Hindustan Republican Association) was formed at Kanpur. Its members were CS Azad, Sachin Sanyal, and Ramprasad Bismil.
oIn 1929, HSRA (Hindustan Socialist Republic Association) was formed at Firozeshah Kotla Delhi. Bhagat Singh joined HSRA.
oOn 9 Aug 1925 Kakori Train Dacoit, in this conspiracy case Ram Prasad Bismil, Rajendra Lahiri, Roshan Lal, and Asafaqullah khan were hanged to death.
oOn 23rd March 1931 Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev were hanged to death in Lahore Conspiracy Case.
oOn 8 November 1927 Simon Commission was appointed by the British Conservative government under Stanley Baldwin. To inquire in the working system of Government in the country after the reform act of 1919.
oNehru Report- 1928 for dominion status, universal adult franchise, etc.
oJinnah’s 14 point program on 31st March 1929.
oIn 1929 Lahore Session of INC presided by Jawaharlal Nehru where the congress passed the resolution of Purna Swaraj and decided to launch a Civil Disobedience movement under the leadership of Gandhi Ji.
o
oCivil Disobedience Movement was started with the Dandi March. From 12 March to 6 April 1930 Gandhi Ji along with his 78 followers, marched from Sabarmati Ashram to Dandi and broke the salt law by making salt on 6th April 1930.
oOn 5th March 1931, Gandhi Irwin Pact was signed.
oOn 12 November 1930 First Round Table Conference was held.
oOn 23rd March 1931 Trial of Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev.
oOn 29 March 1931 Karachi Session of INC, presided over by Vallabh Bhai Patel. In this session, the first time, a resolution of Fundamental Rights and Economic policy were passed.
oOn 16th August 1932 Communal or Ramsay Macdonald Award was announced.
oOn 7th September 1931, the Second Round Table Conference was held in which Gandhi Ji participated on behalf of congress.
oOn 26th September 1932 Poona pact was signed.
oOn November 1932, the Third Round Table Conference was held.
oIn 1935, Government of India Act was passed to create All India Federation, Provincial Autonomy and Diarchy should be there in the center.
Towards Quit India Movement
oOn September 1939 IInd World War broke out, and India was declared an ally without its consent.
oOn 10th August 1940 – August Offer was announced by Lord Linlithgow viceroy to get the support of Indians in the Second World War.
oIn 1939 S.C Bose founded Forward Bloc. It was a left party.
oOn 11th March 1942, Prime Minister Winstill Churchill announced for sending a mission under the chairmanship of Sir Stafford Cripps to find out the solution of constitutional deadlock and problems of Indians.
oWith the failure of Cripps Mission, Quit India movement was started in 1942 by the Indian leaders and the resolution of Quit India, and it was drafted by Gandhi Ji. Gandhi Ji gave a call for Do or Die.
oIn 1942 – Indian National Army was founded by Captain Mohan Singh and Niranjan Gill at Singapore. S. C Bose took over its command of 2nd Headquarter at Singapore and Rangoon.
oOn 21st October 1943 – Azad Hind Government was set up at Singapore under S.C Bose. There was a women regiment known as Rani Jhansi.
oIn 1945, the Second World War was ended.
oIn 1946, Cabinet Mission Plan was announced by PM Clement Attlee.
oIn 1945 – Shimla Conference or Wavell Plan was proposed by Lord Wavell to solve the political deadlock.
o
oOn 2nd September 1946 – Interim Government was set up under J.L Nehru.
oOn March 1947 – Lord Mountbatten was sent to India to find a way to transfer of power. Also known as Plan Balkan.
oAfter reading about the history of the Indian National Movement, we come to know about Extremist and Moderates.
oOn 3rd June Independence of India Act, 1947 was passed by which powers were transferred to two Dominion States India and Pakistan.
Also, Check out the History of National Flag of India
Who were Moderates and Extremist
While in a session of Surat in 1907 the Congress was split up into two factions which came out to be known as moderates and Extremists. The moderates have their hold on the party while extremists followed a bold path and independent path.
It gave rise to many of the national movements which led to the Freedom of India. Both the extremists and moderates played an important role in History of India and Indian National Movement and its Freedom.
Radical Nationalists
“Swaraj is my birthright, and I shall have it,” said Tilak. Aurobindo Ghosh declared, “Political freedom is the life-breath of a nation.” Lala Lajpat Rai thundered, “Indians should no longer be content to be beggars whining for favors; for, if they cared for their country, they would have to strike a blow for themselves.” These ideas were too radical to contemporary thinking. Their authors, therefore, came to be known as the radical nationalists. Being too restive for the results, they were also called the extremists or the militant nationalists.
On 28 December 1885 Indian National Congress (INC) was founded in the premises of Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit School at Bombay. It was presided over by W.C Banerjee and attended by 72 delegates. A.O Hume played an instrumental role in the foundation of INC with an aim to provide Safety Valve to the British Government.
A.O Hume served as a first General Secretary of INC.
Real Aim of Congress is to trained the Indian youth in political agitation and to organise or to create public opinion in the country. For this they use the method of annual session where they discuss the problem and passed the resolution.
The first or early phase of Indian Nationalism is also termed as Moderate Phase (1885-1905). Moderate leaders were W.C Banerjee, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, R.C Dutt, Ferozeshah Mehta, George Yule etc.
Moderates have full faith in British Government and adopted PPP path i.e. Protest, Prayer and Petition.
Due to disillusionment from Moderates methods of work, extremism began to develop within the congress after 1892. The Extremist leaders were Lala Lajpat Rai, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipinchandra Pal and Aurobindo Ghosh. Instead of PPP path they emphasise on self-reliance, constructive work and swadeshi.
With the announcement of Partition of Bengal (1905) by Lord Curzon for administrative convenience, Swadeshi and Boycott resolution was passed in 1905.


1. 1905 – Congress session in Banaras. Presided over by Gopal Krishan Gokhale.
2. 1906 – Congress Session in Calcutta. Presided over by Dadabhai Naroji.
3. 1907 – Congress Session in Surat on the bank of the river Tapti. Presided over by Pherozeshah Mehta where due to the differences between Moderates and Extremist first split in Congress occurred.
Muslim League was founded in 1906 by Agah Khan III and Moshin Mulk.Separate electorate was introduced by the Act of 1909 Morley- Minto Reform Act.Gadhar Movement was started by Lala Hardayal in 1913 and founded the Gadhar party on 1st November 1913 at Kotland. Its headquarter was set up in the form of Yugantar Ashram at San Francisco and started the publication of Gadhar Journal.
Komgata Maru incident took place on September 1914 and for this Indians set up a committee named as Shore Committee to fight the legal battle of the passengers.In 1914 First World War broke out.Tilak on April 1916 started Home Rule Movement and it’s headquarter was at Poona and demanded Swaraj.Annie Besant on September 1916 started Home Rule movement and it’s headquarter was at Adiyar near Madras.Lucknow Session of Congress 1916 presided over by Ambika Charan Majumdar (Moderate leader) where both Extremist and Moderate leaders were united.Government of India Act 1919 or Montagu- Chelmsford Reform Act was passed to establish a responsible Government in India.
On 9th January 1915 Gandhi ji return to India from South Africa at the age of 46.In 1916 Gandhi Ji founded Sabarmati Ashram at Ahmadabad (Gujarat) to preach the idea of truth and non-violence.
Champaran Satyagraha – 1917
Kheda Satyagraha – 1917
Ahmadabad Mill Strike – 1918
Rowlatt Act Satyagraha February,1919

Gandhi ji founded the Satyagraha Sabha in February, 1919. In this movement student, middle class, labour and capitalist participated and congress as an organisation was nowhere. This was the first mass movement of Gandhi ji.
Jallianwala Bagh Massacre – 13 April, 1919. People were gathered at Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar to protest against arrest on Saifuddin Kitchlew and Satyapal on 13 April 1919.
On 1st August 1920 Khilafat Committee launched a Non-Cooperation movement on triple issues- Punjab wrongs, Khilafat issue and Demand for Swaraj.Therefore,  Non-Cooperation Movement was started on 1920.
In October 1920 All India Trade Union Congress was founded in Bombay by N. M Joshi, Ray Chaudhary. Presided over by Lala Lajpat Ray
Akali Movement was started in 1920.
In 1925, SGPC (Shiromani Gurudwara Prabhandak Committee) was founded.
Congress Khilafat Swaraj Party was formed by CR Das and Motilal Nehru. Also famous for the second split in the congress.
In 1927, Workers & Peasant Party (WPP) was formed at Bombay by S.S Mirajkar, K. N Juglekar and S.V Ghate.
In 1924, H.R.A (Hindustan Republican Association) was formed at Kanpur. Its members were CS Azad, Sachin Sanyal and Ramprasad Bismil.
In 1929, HSRA (Hindustan Socialist Republic Association) was formed at Firozeshah Kotla Delhi. Bhagat Singh joined HSRA.
On 9 Aug, 1925 Kakori Train Dacoit, in this conspiracy case Ram Prasad Bismil, Rajendra Lahiri, Roshan Lal and Asafaqullah khan were hanged to death.
On 23rd March, 1931 Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev were hanged to death in Lahore Conspiracy Case.
On 8 November, 1927 Simon Commission was appointed by the British Conservative Government under Stanley Baldwin. To inquire in the working system of Government in the country after the reform act of 1919.
Nehru Report- 1928 for dominion status, universal adult franchise, etc.
Jinnah’s 14 point programme on 31st March, 1929.
1929 Lahore Session of INC presided by Jawaharlal Nehru where the resolution of Purna Swaraj was passed by the congress and decided to launch a Civil Disobedience movement under the leadership of Gandhi ji.
On 26th January, 1930 Independence Day was celebrated for the 1st time.
Civil Disobedience Movement was started with the Dandi March. From 12 March to 6 April , 1930 Gandhi ji along with his 78 followers marched from Sabarmati Ashram to Dandi and broke the salt law by making salt on 6th April 1930.
On 12 November, 1930 First Round Table Conference was held.
On 5th March, 1931 Gandhi Irwin Pact was signed.
On 23rd March, 1931 Trial of Bhagat Singh, Rajguru and Sukhdev.
On 29 March, 1931 Karachi Session of INC, presided over by Vallabh Bhai Patel. In this session first time a resolution of Fundamental Rights and Economic policy was passed.
On 7th September, 1931 Second Round Table Conference was held in which Gandhi ji participated on the behalf of congress.
On 16th August, 1932 Communal or Ramsay Macdonald Award was announced.
On 26th September, 1932 Poona pact was signed.
On November, 1932 Third Round Table Conference was held.
In 1935, Governmnet of India Act was passed to create All India Federation, Provincial Autonomy and Diarchy should be there in the centre.
Towards Quit India Movement
On September, 1939 IInd World War broke out and India was declared an ally without its consent.
In 1939 S.C Bose founded Forward Bloc. It was a left party.
On 10th August, 1940 – August Offer was announced by Lord Linlithgow viceroy to get the support of Indians in the Second World War.
On 11th March, 1942 Prime Minister Winstill Churchill announced for sending a mission under the chairmanship of Sir Stafford Cripps to find out the solution of constitutional deadlock and problems of Indians.
With the failure of Cripps Mission Quit India movement was started in 1942 by the Indian leaders and the resolution of Quit India was drafted by Gandhi Ji. Gandhi ji gave a call for Do or Die.
In 1942 - Indian National Army was founded by Captain Mohan Singh and Niranjan Gill at Singapore. S. C Bose took over its command of 2nd Headquarter at Singapore and Rangoon.
On 21st October, 1943 – Azad Hind Government was set up at Singapore under S.C Bose. There was a women regiment known as Rani Jhansi.
In 1945, Second World War was ended.
In 1945 – Shimla Conference or Wavell Plan was proposed by Lord Wavell to solve the political deadlock.
In 1946, Cabinet Mission Plan was announced by PM Clement Attlee.
On 2nd September, 1946 - Interim Government was set up under J.L Nehru.
On March, 1947 – Lord Mountbatten was send to India with an aim to find a way to transfer of power. Also known as Plan Balkan.
On 3rd June Independence of India Act 1947 was passed by which powers were transferred to two Dominion States India and Pakistan.


The history of India includes several the prehistoric settlements and various periods of rich cultural, scientific, spiritual and technological advancements; the advancement of civilisation from the earliest recorded Indus Valley Civilisation and events blending of the Indo-Aryan races. This period is spiritually important because of the birth and nourishment of several world religions like Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism;Followed by the onset of a succession of powerful dynasties and empires who made their presence strong and seeded the growth of India with regard to all spheres, also to mention the growth of Muslim dominions during the Medieval period; Everything ending up with the advent of European traders and privateers, resulting in the establishment of British India and other instances of East India company establishments; followed by the subsequent  Indian independence movement that led to various radical transformations such as the Partition of India and the creation of the Republic of India.

auses of Indian National Movement (UPSC Notes):-Download PDF Here
The rise of national consciousness in India took place towards the latter half of the 19th century only. Before that, there were struggles and battles against British colonialism but they were all confined to smaller areas and in any case, did not encompass the whole of India. In fact, some scholars at the time did not consider India to be a country. Though political union had occurred in the past under great kings like Ashoka and Akbar and under the Marathas to an extent, they were not permanent. However, cultural unity was always seen and foreign powers always referred to the subcontinent as India or Hind as being one entity, despite being ruled by many rulers.
It can be said that the national movement, with the political and social emancipation of the people as its aim, arose in India in 1885, with the formation of the Indian National Congress.
Causes of the rise of the National Movement in India
Western education
Macaulay had instituted a western educational system in India with the sole aim of creating a class of educated Indians who could serve their colonial masters in the administration of the ‘natives’. This idea sort of backfired because it created a class of Indians who became exposed to the liberal and radical thoughts of European writers who expounded liberty, equality, democracy and rationality. Also, the English language united Indians from various regions and religions.
Vernacular languages
The 19th century also saw the revival of vernacular languages. This helped the propagation of the ideas of liberty and rational thought to the masses.
End of the old social order
British imperialism put an end to the old social order of the country. This was resented by many Indians.
Socio-religious reform movements
Socio-religious reform movements of the 19th century helped a great deal in the rise of nationalism in India. These movements sought to remove superstition and societal evils prevalent then, and spread the word of unity, rational and scientific thought, women empowerment and patriotism among the people. Notable reformers were Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Jyotiba Phule and so on.
Economic policies of the British
The oppressive economic policies of the British led to widespread poverty and indebtedness among the Indians especially farmers. Famines which led to the deaths of lakhs were a regular occurrence. This led to a bitter sense of suppression and sowed the seeds of a yearning for liberty from foreign rule.
Political unity
Under the British, most parts of India were put under a single political set-up. The system of administration was consolidated and unified throughout in all regions. This factor led to the feeling of ‘oneness’ and nationhood among Indians.
Communications network
The British built a network of roads, railways, post and telegraph systems in the country. This led to increased movements of people from one part of the country to another and increased the flow of information. All this accelerated the rise of a national movement in India.
Growth of the modern press
This period also saw the rise of the Indian press, both in English and in the regional languages. This also was an important factor that helped in the dissemination of information.
Lord Lytton’s policies
Lord Lytton was the Viceroy of India from 1876 to 1880. In 1876, there was a famine in south Indian which saw the deaths of almost 10 million people. His trading policies were criticised for having aggravated the famine. Also, he conducted the grand Delhi Durbar in 1877 spending huge amount of money at a time when people were dying of hunger.
Lytton also passed the Vernacular Press Act 1878 which authorised the government to confiscate newspapers that printed ‘seditious material’. He also passed the Arms Act 1878 which prohibited Indians from carrying weapons of any kind without licenses. The act excluded Englishmen.
Legacy of the Revolt of 1857
After the Revolt of 1857 and its bitter crushing by the British, there was a deep racial tension between the British and the Indians.
Ilbert Bill controversy
In 1883, the Ilbert Bill was introduced which gave Indian judges the power to hear cases against European, by the then Viceroy Lord Ripon and Sir Courtenay Ilbert, the legal advisor to the Council of India. But there was a huge outcry against this bill from Britishers in India and in Britain. Arguments made against this bill displayed the deep racial prejudice the English had for Indians. This also exposed the true nature of British colonialism to the educated Indians.
National movements outside the country
There were many national movements outside the country that inspired the Indian nationalists like the French Revolution, the American War of Independence and so on.
